Maintenance: fix broken links (#7002)
GoogleChrome/web.dev: src/site/content/en/blog/designcember-calculator/index.md

---
layout: post
title: 'Designcember Calculator'
authors:
  - thomassteiner
hero: image/kheDArv5csY6rvQUJDbWRscckLr1/kKhOZkehYIQ49GQOXrsw.png
alt: 'Designcember'
thumbnail: image/kheDArv5csY6rvQUJDbWRscckLr1/qRLa7xFsolDUbEfyugoW.png
subhead: >
  A skeuomorphic attempt at recreating a solar calculator on the web with the Window Controls
  Overlay API and the Ambient Light Sensor API.
description: >
  A skeuomorphic attempt at recreating a solar calculator on the web that makes use of the ambient
  light sensor and the window controls overlay feature.
date: 2021-12-26
tags:
  - blog
  - capabilities
  - css
---

## The challenge

> I am a kid of the 1980s. A thing that was all the rage back when I was in highschool were solar

Author: Hah, that's a funny one. Here's the story: As a learner of English, you're supposed to pass tests like [TOEFL](https://www.ets.org/toefl), for example, to enter university. These tests include exercises like "write an essay of 500 words on $topic". If you write "I'm", that's one word in their counting. If you write "I am", that's two. So it's a stupid trick to get enough safe words you know how to spell and reduce the risk of introducing errors. It's deeply rooted in my writing when I need to be error-free.

calculators. We were all given a
[TI-30X SOLAR](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/TI-30#/media/File:TI-30X_SOLAR,_2.jpg) by the school,
and I have fond memories of us benchmarking our calculators against each other by calculating the
factorial of 69, the highest number the TI-30X could handle. (The speed variance was very

> measurable, I have still no idea why.)

Reviewer: Manufacturing deficiencies? [I've read that](https://www.amazon.com/Dealers-Lightning-Xerox-PARC-Computer/dp/0887309895/ref=sr_1_1?crid=QALGZ279BM9J&keywords=dealers+in+lightning&qid=1639072837&sprefix=dealers+in+light%2Caps%2C201&sr=8-1) the first line of integrated circuits that Intel produced were so bad coming off the production line that they had college educated engineers testing every unit that came off the line. The guys who did it called it 'turd polishing'.

Author: It was several seconds at times. We all got the same calculators at the same time, I guess manufacturing variances, too, but it astonishes me…

## Make it installable

While not a bad start, I decided to pump it up for full skeuomorphic awesomeness. The first step was
to make it a PWA so it could be installed. I maintain a
[baseline PWA template on Glitch](https://glitch.com/edit/#!/baseline-pwa) that I remix whenever I
need a quick demo. Its service worker will not win you any coding award and it is definitely _not_
production-ready, but it is sufficient to trigger Chromium's mini infobar so the app can be
installed.

```js
self.addEventListener('install', (event) => {
  self.skipWaiting();
});

self.addEventListener('activate', (event) => {
  self.clients.claim();
  event.waitUntil(
    (async () => {
      if ('navigationPreload' in self.registration) {
        await self.registration.navigationPreload.enable();
      }
    })(),
  );
});

self.addEventListener('fetch', (event) => {
  event.respondWith(
    (async () => {
      try {
        const response = await event.preloadResponse;
        if (response) {
          return response;
        }
        return fetch(event.request);
      } catch {
        return new Response('Offline');
      }
    })(),
  );
});
```

> ## Blending in on mobile

Reviewer: I don't understand this heading.

My first thought is that 'Blending in' should be 'Blending', but I don't know what you're trying to say. ('In' is a redundancy that's implied by 'blending'. You can't blend out.)

Author: I mean "blending in" as in  "[to look like things nearby](https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/blend%20in#:~:text=to%20look%20like%20things%20nearby)". The idea is to make it feel like any other app, and not like a Web app.

> Now that the app is installable, the next step is to make it blend in as much as possible. On

Reviewer: 'Blend in' again.

> Now that the app is installable, the next step is to make it blend in as much as possible. On

Author: ```suggestion
Now that the app is installable, the next step is to make it blend in with the operating system apps as much as possible. On
```

> mobile, this can be done by setting the display mode to `fullscreen` in the Web App Manifest.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
mobile, do this by setting the display mode to `fullscreen` in the Web App Manifest.
```

Reviewer: Please use active voice.

```json
{
  "display": "fullscreen"
}
```

On devices with a camera hole or notch,
[tweaking the viewport](https://webkit.org/blog/7929/designing-websites-for-iphone-x/) so that the
content covers the whole screen makes the app look gorgeous.

```html
<meta name="viewport" content="initial-scale=1, viewport-fit=cover" />
```

{% Img src="image/8WbTDNrhLsU0El80frMBGE4eMCD3/kEOrYPiDbg6DSTGHeB0C.jpg", alt="Designcember Calculator running fullscreen on a Pixel 6 Pro phone.", width="800", height="773" %}

> ## Blending in on desktop

Author: ```suggestion
## Blending with desktop
```

> On desktop, there is a cool feature I can make use of,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On desktop, there is a cool feature I can use:
```

[Window Controls Overlay](/window-controls-overlay/), which allows me to put content in the title
bar of the app window. The first step is to override the display mode fallback sequence so it tries
to use `window-controls-overlay` first when it is available.

```json
{
  "display_override": ["window-controls-overlay"]
}
```

This makes the title bar effectively go away and the content moves up into the title bar area as if
the title bar were not there. My idea is to move the skeuomorphic solar cell up into the title bar

> and the rest of the calculator UI down accordingly, which I can do with some CSS that makes use of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and the rest of the calculator UI down accordingly, which I can do with some CSS that uses
```

the `titlebar-area-*` environment variables. You will notice that all the selectors carry a `wco`
class, which will be relevant a couple of paragraphs down.

```css
#calc_solar_cell.wco {
  position: fixed;
  left: calc(0.25rem + env(titlebar-area-x, 0));
  top: calc(0.75rem + env(titlebar-area-y, 0));
  width: calc(env(titlebar-area-width, 100%) - 0.5rem);
  height: calc(env(titlebar-area-height, 33px) - 0.5rem);
}

#calc_display_surface.wco {
  margin-top: calc(env(titlebar-area-height, 33px) - 0.5rem);
}
```

> Up next, I need to decide which elements to make draggable, since the title bar that I would usually

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, I need to decide which elements to make draggable, since the title bar that I would usually
```

> use for dragging is not available. In the style of a classic widget, I can even decide to make the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
use for dragging is not available. In the style of a classic widget, I can even make the
```

Reviewer: I don't know if I've ever told you this, but the thing I'm replacing is called an inflated verb. They're devilishly hard to avoid. I thought I was good at avoiding them. I was editing something I wrote on my own time last night and found them all over the place.

Author: Hehe :-) It's always a lot easier to spot others doing such things…

entire calculator draggable by applying `(-webkit-)app-region: drag`, apart from the buttons, which
get `(-webkit-)app-region: no-drag` so they cannot be used to drag.

```css
#calc_inside.wco,
#calc_solar_cell.wco {
  -webkit-app-region: drag;
  app-region: drag;
}

button {
  -webkit-app-region: no-drag;
  app-region: no-drag;
}
```

The final step is to make the app reactive to window controls overlay changes. In a true progressive
enhancement approach, I only load the code for this feature when the browser supports it.

```js
if ('windowControlsOverlay' in navigator) {

>   import('/wco.js');

Reviewer: Have we ever written an article about this?

Author: Yes, it's linked on line 104: https://web.dev/window-controls-overlay/.

}
```

> Whenever the window controls overlay geometry changes, I make some modifications to the app to make

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Whenever the window controls overlay geometry changes, I modify the app to make
```

    const later = () => {
      clearTimeout(timeout);
      func(...args);
    };
    clearTimeout(timeout);
    timeout = setTimeout(later, wait);
  };
};

navigator.windowControlsOverlay.ongeometrychange = debounce((e) => {
  toggleWCO();
}, 250);

toggleWCO();
```

Now with all this in place, I get a calculator widget that feels almost like the classic
[Winamp](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Winamp) with one of the oldschool
[Winamp&nbsp; themes](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Winamp#/media/File:Winamp5.png). I can now
freely place the calculator on my desktop and activate the window controls feature by clicking the
chevron in the upper right corner.

{% Img src="image/8WbTDNrhLsU0El80frMBGE4eMCD3/9iqLIfTrHYv0O8J1tBrr.png", alt="Designcember Calculator running in standalone mode with the Window Controls Overlay feature active. The display spells 'Google' in the calculator alphabet.", width="267", height="430" %}

## An actually working solar cell

For the ultimate geekery, I of course needed to make the solar cell actually work. The calculator
should only be functioning if there is enough light. The way I modeled this is through setting the

> CSS `opacity` of the digits on the display via a CSS variable `--opacity` that I can control via

Reviewer: ```suggestion
CSS `opacity` of the digits on the display via a CSS variable `--opacity` that I control via
```

JavaScript.

```css
:root {
  --opacity: 0.75;
}

#calc_expression,
#calc_result {
  opacity: var(--opacity);
}
```

To detect if enough light is available for the calculator to work, I use the
[`AmbientLightSensor`](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/API/AmbientLightSensor) API. For
this API to be available, I needed to set the `#enable-generic-sensor-extra-classes` flag in
`about:flags` and request the `'ambient-light-sensor'` permission. As before, I use progressive
enhancement to only load the relevant code when the API is supported.

```js
if ('AmbientLightSensor' in window) {
  import('/als.js');
}
```

The sensor returns the ambient light in [lux](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lux) units whenever a
new reading is available. Based on a
[table of values](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lux#Illuminance) of typical light situations, I came

> up with a very simple formula to convert the lux value to a value between 0 and 1 that I then set
> programmatically for the `--opacity` variable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
up with a very simple formula to convert the lux value to a value between 0 and 1 that I
programmatically set the `--opacity` variable.
```

```js
const luxToOpacity = (lux) => {
  if (lux > 250) {
    return 1;
  }
  return lux / 250;
};

const sensor = new window.AmbientLightSensor();
sensor.onreading = () => {
  console.log('Current light level:', sensor.illuminance);
  document.documentElement.style.setProperty(
    '--opacity',
    luxToOpacity(sensor.illuminance),
  );
};
sensor.onerror = (event) => {
  console.log(event.error.name, event.error.message);
};

(async () => {
  const {state} = await navigator.permissions.query({
    name: 'ambient-light-sensor',
  });
  if (state === 'granted') {
    sensor.start();
  }
})();
```

In the video below you can see how the calculator starts working once I turn the room light up

> enough. And there you have it, a skeuomorphic solar calculator that is actually working. My good old

Reviewer: ```suggestion
enough. And there you have it: a skeuomorphic solar calculator that actually works. My good old
```

> time-tested TI-30X SOLAR has come a long way indeed…

Reviewer: ```suggestion
time-tested TI-30X SOLAR has come a long way indeed.
```

{% Video autoplay=true, muted=true, loop=true, playsinline=true, src="video/8WbTDNrhLsU0El80frMBGE4eMCD3/lXUTb872NtCdw7fqrQY3.mp4" %}

## Demo

Be sure to play with the [Designcember Calculator demo](https://designcember-calculator.glitch.me/)
and check out the [source code on Glitch](https://glitch.com/edit/#!/designcember-calculator). (To

> install the app, you need to open it in its own window, the embedded version below will not trigger

Reviewer: ```suggestion
install the app, you need to open it in its own window. The embedded version below will not trigger
```
